Now that we know the features of AWS Config and understood its terminologies,
let's jump into a quick demo and track config changes with AWS Config.
I just logged into my AWS console.
Click on Config, and you will be taken to AWS Config dashboard.
If you don't have any configs already set up,
you will see a simple Get started button.
Click on Get started.
In the Settings page, I'm going to record all the resources in the region.
I also have the option to select specific types.
The S3 bucket will store all the configuration history,
and I'm going to create a new bucket.
The SNS topic will receive all config changes,
and since I have a topic already set up,
I'm going to choose that.
Since AWS Config is going to keep track of all the
configuration changes of your AWS resource,
you need to create a role with read‑only access.
Since I don't have a role set up yet,
I'm going to create a new service‑linked role now.
Click Next.
You have an option to select the Config rules that
will be used to check your resources.
AWS has 86 built‑in rules that you can leverage,
or you can create your own custom rules.
I'm going to select all of them.
Click Next,
and you will see the review page that lists a brief description of all the
rules and the settings that you previously selected.
Click Confirm to start AWS Config creation process.
This is a time‑consuming process.
Once the creation is completed, you will see a dashboard page.
I'm going to switch to the redesigned AWS Config page.
You can see the dashboard lists all the resources that
are currently part of my account.
And under Compliance status,
you can see there are 25 noncompliant items and 30 noncompliant resources.
I'm going to click to view all the noncompliant rules.
You can view on any specific rule to look at the rule details and the
resources that didn't comply with this specific rule.
I'm going to remediate one of the noncompliant items and see how the
changes get tracked and reflected in AWS Config.
Let me go back to the dashboard, click on EC2 instances,
and you will see there are four EC2 instances that are part of my account.
I'm going to choose the instance that ends in 8668.
You can see there are two noncompliant items,
and one of them being the instance not having detailed monitoring enabled.
Let's go back to AWS console and select EC2.
Click on Instances.
Select the instance that ends in 8668.
Click on Action.
Choose CloudWatch Monitoring, and click on Enable Detailed Monitoring.
You need to use caution while using this option as
enabling this may incur additional charges.
Let's go back to AWS Config.
Choose EC2 Instances.
Select the instance for which we enabled detailed monitoring,
and you can see the status is compliant against the specific rule.
Click on Resource Timeline at the top. Resource Timeline is a
fantastic feature offered by AWS Config that shows the config
changes that took place over a period of time.
You can see there are seven changes that happened at this specific instance.
Click on that. This is a JSON representation of all the changes.
You can see the state change from running to stopped. And under the
State Reason, you can see User Initiated shutdown when it was
manually shut down by me. Next to that, there is one config change
at a different time,
and you can see it is keeping track of the monitoring state,
the one when we enabled detailed monitoring.
Let's go back to the dashboard.
Click on Settings.
This is a snapshot of all the settings that we chose when we created the AWS
Config. You have the option to edit these changes and select any specific
resources to record. Choose a different S3 bucket or a different SNS topic any
time. I'm going to leave all these changes as is.
Now let's quickly see how CloudTrail works closely with AWS Config.
Let me go back to AWS Config dashboard, click on EC2
Instances, select the instance that ends in 8668, click on
Resource Timeline. At the bottom, you can see CloudTrail events.
Let me alert you that this may take a while before
this even shows up in AWS Config.
Click on CloudTrail, and you'll be taken to CloudTrail console.
Under Event history, you can see an event named MonitorInstances by root user.
You can see the inverse reference from CloudTrail back to Config.
Click on View Event. This is the entire JSON representation of the event.
Click Close, and I'm going to go back to Config timeline.
Let's check on Compliance timeline. Click on Rules, and you can see a
timeline of changes that happened to this resource that made it
noncompliant, and at the the bottom under the Rules section,
you can see the rule that it is not compliant with.
Let's quickly check how to navigate the relationship tree. Click
on Relationships. Click on the EC2 instance,
You can see that this instance is related to five other resources.
Let me click on SecurityGroup, and you can see the resources
that this security group is related with.
This is a very handy tool to understand the relationship metrics between various AWS resources.